Overhaul AI Gateway docs for new architecture (#2196)
ngrok/ngrok-docs: ai-gateway/concepts/providers.mdx

---
title: Providers
description: Built-in and custom AI providers in the ngrok AI Gateway.
---

Providers are the AI services that host and serve models. The AI Gateway routes your requests to providers and handles authentication, failover, and observability.

> Manage providers in [app.ngrok.ai](https://app.ngrok.ai). See [Configuring providers](/ai-gateway/guides/configuring-providers) for built-in and custom setup. The dashboard separates **built-in** catalog providers from **custom** providers you define.

Reviewer: Some of the copy throughout this PR feels a bit too terse/cold to me. "You can" makes it feel a bit more friendly and personable

```suggestion
You can manage providers at [app.ngrok.ai](https://app.ngrok.ai). See [Configuring providers](/ai-gateway/guides/configuring-providers) for built-in and custom setup. The dashboard separates **built-in** catalog providers from **custom** providers you define.
```

## Built-in providers

> Built-in providers are public AI APIs with a known model catalog—OpenAI, Anthropic, Google, Groq, and others listed in the [model catalog](/ai-gateway/reference/model-catalog). Send requests with an [access key](/ai-gateway/concepts/api-keys). Your access key authenticates you to the gateway, not to the upstream provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Built-in providers are public AI APIs with a known model catalog: OpenAI, Anthropic, Google, Groq, and others listed in the [model catalog](/ai-gateway/reference/model-catalog). You can send requests with an [access key](/ai-gateway/concepts/api-keys). Your access key authenticates you to the gateway, not to the upstream provider.
```

For **OpenAI** and **Anthropic**, the AI Gateway can supply upstream credentials when you have [credits](/ai-gateway/concepts/credits). You aren't required to have your own provider account or provider API keys—the AI Gateway handles upstream authentication and bills model cost through credits.

> For other built-in providers, [add a provider key](/ai-gateway/guides/attaching-provider-keys#add-a-provider-key) to bring your own key. Upstream costs go to your provider account; credits still cover the gateway processing fee. Other products sometimes call this BYOK (bring your own key).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For other built-in providers, [add a provider key](/ai-gateway/guides/attaching-provider-keys#add-a-provider-key) to bring your own key. Upstream costs go to your provider account; credits still cover the gateway processing fee. This is generally referred to as BYOK (bring your own key).
```
